v9.0.0 release notes: add new features (v9.0-beta.2) (#21127)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-9.0.0.md

### Performance

> * Optimize performance for creating databases, tables, and adding columns in scenarios with foreign keys [#61126](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/61126) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1896 beta.2-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optimize performance for creating databases, tables, and adding columns in scenarios involving tables with foreign keys [#61126](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/61126) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1896 beta.2-->
```

    Before v9.0.0, TiDB encounters significant performance bottlenecks when creating tables with foreign keys in certain SaaS scenarios, especially when the number of tables in a cluster reaches tens of millions. A large number of foreign key relationships further slows down the execution of DDL operations such as `CREATE TABLE` and `ADD COLUMN`.

>     Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB optimizes the handling of related metadata, significantly improving DDL performance in scenarios with extremely large table counts. According to internal tests, under idle cluster workload and with a connection to the DDL owner node, the table creation speed can reach up to 126 tables per second, and the average execution speed of the `ADD COLUMN` operation is approximately 45.5 tables per second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB optimizes the handling logic of related metadata, significantly improving DDL performance in scenarios with extremely large tables. According to internal tests, under idle cluster workload and with a connection to the DDL owner node, the table creation speed can reach up to 126 tables per second, and the average execution speed of the `ADD COLUMN` operation is approximately 45.5 tables per second.
```

### Performance

* Optimize performance for creating databases, tables, and adding columns in scenarios with foreign keys [#61126](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/61126) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1896 beta.2-->

    In earlier versions, TiDB encounters significant performance bottlenecks when creating tables with foreign keys in certain SaaS scenarios, especially when the number of tables in a cluster reaches tens of millions. A large number of foreign key relationships further slows down the execution of DDL operations such as `CREATE TABLE` and `ADD COLUMN`.

    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB optimizes the handling of related metadata, significantly improving DDL performance in scenarios with extremely large table counts. According to internal tests, under idle cluster workload and with a connection to the DDL owner node, the table creation speed can reach up to 126 tables per second, and the average execution speed of the `ADD COLUMN` operation is approximately 45.5 tables per second.

> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Performance

> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).
> 
> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Optimize performance for creating databases, tables, and adding columns in scenarios with foreign keys [#61126](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/61126) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1896 beta.2-->

    In earlier versions, TiDB encounters significant performance bottlenecks when creating tables with foreign keys in certain SaaS scenarios, especially when the number of tables in a cluster reaches tens of millions. A large number of foreign key relationships further slows down the execution of DDL operations such as `CREATE TABLE` and `ADD COLUMN`.

    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB optimizes the handling of related metadata, significantly improving DDL performance in scenarios with extremely large table counts. According to internal tests, under idle cluster workload and with a connection to the DDL owner node, the table creation speed can reach up to 126 tables per second, and the average execution speed of the `ADD COLUMN` operation is approximately 45.5 tables per second.

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).
```

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).

* TiProxy officially supports the traffic replay feature (GA) [#642](https://github.com/pingcap/tiproxy/issues/642) @[djshow832](https://github.com/djshow832) tw@hfxsd<!--2062-->

    In TiProxy v1.3.0, the traffic replay feature is released as an experimental feature. In TiProxy v1.4.0, the traffic replay feature becomes generally available (GA). TiProxy provides specialized SQL commands for traffic capture and replay. This feature lets you easily capture access traffic from TiDB production clusters and replay it at a specified rate in test clusters, facilitating business validation.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiproxy/tiproxy-traffic-replay.md).

### Reliability

* Introduce a mechanism for detecting connection interruption to automatically terminate running SQL statements on the server side once the client is disconnected [#60685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/60685) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) **tw@hfxsd** <!--2060 beta.2-->

>     To improve resource utilization and system stability, TiDB v9.0.0 introduces a mechanism for detecting connection interruption. When a client connection is unexpectedly closed, TiDB terminates SQL statements that are still running on that connection, promptly releasing resources and preventing long-running invalid statements from impacting system performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To improve resource utilization and system stability, TiDB v9.0.0 introduces a mechanism for detecting connection interruption. When a client disconnects unexpectedly, TiDB proactively terminates SQL statements that are still running on that connection, promptly releasing resources and preventing long-running invalid statements from impacting system performance.
```

* Introduce the table mode to restrict read and write operations during data restore, improving task stability and data consistency [#59008](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/59008) @[fishiu](https://github.com/fishiu) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) @[Tristan1900](https://github.com/Tristan1900) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)   **tw@hfxsd** <!--2056 beta.2-->

>     TiDB introduces the table mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the table mode of the target table is automatically set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the table mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    TiDB v9.0.0 introduces the table mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the table mode of the target table is automatically set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the table mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.
```

>     TiDB v9.0.0 introduces the table mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the table mode of the target table is automatically set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the table mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v9.0.0 introduces the table mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the table mode of the target table is automatically set to `restore`. In this mode, all read and write operations on the table are disallowed. Once the restore process completes, the table mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular read and write operations. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.
```

    Note that if you upgrade the TiDB cluster from an earlier version to v9.0.0, existing resource groups retain their original behavior (`UNLIMITED`). To switch to the `MODERATED` mode, you must modify the resource group configuration using [`ALTER RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-resource-group.md).

    The `MODERATED` mode is well-suited for environments where multiple resource groups have similar priority. It allows some groups to safely overflow their quotas, improving resource utilization while maintaining quality of service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-resource-group.md).

### SQL

> * Support the `gb18030` character set and `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations [#17470](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/17470) [#55791](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/55791) @[cbcwestwolf](https://github.com/cbcwestwolf) *tw@hfxsd* <!--1962 beta.2-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support the `gb18030` character set, and `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations [#17470](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/17470) [#55791](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/55791) @[cbcwestwolf](https://github.com/cbcwestwolf) *tw@hfxsd* <!--1962 beta.2-->
```

>     Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB supports the `gb18030` character set along with the `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations, enabling better handling of Chinese-language data storage and query requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB supports the `gb18030` character set along with the `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations, improving TiDB's ability to store and query data in Chinese.
```

    In TiProxy v1.3.0, the traffic replay feature is released as an experimental feature. In TiProxy v1.4.0, the traffic replay feature becomes generally available (GA). TiProxy provides specialized SQL commands for traffic capture and replay. This feature lets you easily capture access traffic from TiDB production clusters and replay it at a specified rate in test clusters, facilitating business validation.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiproxy/tiproxy-traffic-replay.md).

### Reliability

* Introduce a mechanism for detecting connection interruption to automatically terminate running SQL statements on the server side once the client is disconnected [#60685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/60685) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) **tw@hfxsd** <!--2060 beta.2-->

    To improve resource utilization and system stability, TiDB v9.0.0 introduces a mechanism for detecting connection interruption. When a client connection is unexpectedly closed, TiDB terminates SQL statements that are still running on that connection, promptly releasing resources and preventing long-running invalid statements from impacting system performance.

> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Reliability

* Introduce a mechanism for detecting connection interruption to automatically terminate running SQL statements on the server side once the client is disconnected [#60685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/60685) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) **tw@hfxsd** <!--2060 beta.2-->

    To improve resource utilization and system stability, TiDB v9.0.0 introduces a mechanism for detecting connection interruption. When a client connection is unexpectedly closed, TiDB terminates SQL statements that are still running on that connection, promptly releasing resources and preventing long-running invalid statements from impacting system performance.

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).

> * Introduce Table Mode to restrict read and write operations during data restore, improving task stability and data consistency [#59008](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/59008) @[fishiu](https://github.com/fishiu) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) @[Tristan1900](https://github.com/Tristan1900) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)   **tw@hfxsd** <!--2056 beta.2-->
> 
>     TiDB introduces Table Mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the Table Mode of the target table is set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the Table Mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Introduce the table mode to restrict read and write operations during data restore, improving task stability and data consistency [#59008](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/59008) @[fishiu](https://github.com/fishiu) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) @[Tristan1900](https://github.com/Tristan1900) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)   **tw@hfxsd** <!--2056 beta.2-->

    TiDB introduces the table mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the table mode of the target table is automatically set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the table mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.
```

### Reliability

> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).
> 
> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Introduce a mechanism for detecting connection interruption to automatically terminate running SQL statements on the server side once the client is disconnected [#60685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/60685) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) **tw@hfxsd** <!--2060 beta.2-->

    To improve resource utilization and system stability, TiDB v9.0.0 introduces a mechanism for detecting connection interruption. When a client connection is unexpectedly closed, TiDB terminates SQL statements that are still running on that connection, promptly releasing resources and preventing long-running invalid statements from impacting system performance.

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).

* Introduce Table Mode to restrict read and write operations during data restore, improving task stability and data consistency [#59008](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/59008) @[fishiu](https://github.com/fishiu) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i) @[Tristan1900](https://github.com/Tristan1900) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)   **tw@hfxsd** <!--2056 beta.2-->

    TiDB introduces Table Mode to enhance the stability and consistency of backup and restore tasks. When performing snapshot restore or PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), the Table Mode of the target table is set to `restore`. In this mode, all user read and write operations on the table are blocked. Once the restore process completes, the Table Mode automatically switches back to `normal`, allowing regular access to the table. This mechanism ensures greater stability and consistency during data recovery.

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).
```

### SQL

* Support the `gb18030` character set and `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations [#17470](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/17470) [#55791](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/55791) @[cbcwestwolf](https://github.com/cbcwestwolf) *tw@hfxsd* <!--1962 beta.2--> 

    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB supports the `gb18030` character set along with the `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations, enabling better handling of Chinese-language data storage and query requirements.

    - The `gb18030` character set is a widely used standard for Chinese character encoding.
    - The `gb18030_bin` collation provides precise binary-based sorting, while `gb18030_chinese_ci` supports case-insensitive general collation. These two collations offer more flexible and efficient sorting and comparison for text encoded in `gb18030`.

  By supporting the `gb18030` character set and its collations, TiDB v9.0.0 improves compatibility with Chinese-language applications. This enhancement simplifies character set selection and operations in multilingual and multi-encoding scenarios, improving the overall user experience.

>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [Documentation](/character-set-gb18030.md).
```

### SQL

> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).
> 
> * Placeholder for feature summary [#Issue-number](issue-link) @[Contributor-GitHub-ID](id-link) **tw@xxx** <!--1234 beta.2-->
> 
>     Provide a concise overview of what the feature is, the value it offers to users, and include a brief sentence on how to use it effectively. If there are any particularly important aspects of this feature, be sure to mention them as well.
> 
>     For more information, see [Documentation](link).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support the `gb18030` character set and `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations [#17470](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/17470) [#55791](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/55791) @[cbcwestwolf](https://github.com/cbcwestwolf) *tw@hfxsd* <!--1962 beta.2--> 

    Starting from v9.0.0, TiDB supports the `gb18030` character set along with the `gb18030_bin` and `gb18030_chinese_ci` collations, enabling better handling of Chinese-language data storage and query requirements.

    - The `gb18030` character set is a widely used standard for Chinese character encoding.
    - The `gb18030_bin` collation provides precise binary-based sorting, while `gb18030_chinese_ci` supports case-insensitive general collation. These two collations offer more flexible and efficient sorting and comparison for text encoded in `gb18030`.

  By supporting the `gb18030` character set and its collations, TiDB v9.0.0 improves compatibility with Chinese-language applications. This enhancement simplifies character set selection and operations in multilingual and multi-encoding scenarios, improving the overall user experience.

    For more information, see [Documentation](link).
```
